


2
Normative references

The following normative documents contain provisions which, through
reference in this text, constitute provisions of this ECSS Standard. For dated
references, subsequent amendments to, or revision of any of these publications
do not apply, However, parties to agreements based on this ECSS Standard are
encouraged to investigate the possibility of applying the more recent editions of
the normative documents indicated below. For undated references, the latest
edition of the publication referred to applies.

ECSS-S-ST-00-01 ECSS system Glossary of terms
ECSS-Q-ST-10-04 Space product assurance Critical-item control

ECSS-Q-ST-10-09 Space product assurance Nonconformance control
system




3
Terms, definitions and abbreviated terms

3.1 Terms and definitions from other standards

For the purpose of this Standard, the terms and definitions from ECSS-ST-00-01
apply, in particular for the following terms:

acceptance

alert

approval
assembly

audit

component
configuration item
conformance
critical item
customer
dependability
failure

function
nonconformance
performance
planetary protection
procedure

process

product

product assurance
project
qualification
quality assurance

review




risk

safety

space mission
supplier
system
traceability

waiver

3.2 Abbreviated terms

For the purpose of this Standard, the abbreviated terms from ECSS-S-ST-00-01

and the following apply:
Abbreviation Meaning
EEE electrical, electronic, electromechanical
MIP mandatory inspection point
PA product assurance
QA quality assurance
QSL qualification status list




4
Principles

4.1 General principles

The prime objective of Product Assurance is to ensure that space products
accomplish their defined mission objectives in a safe, available and reliable
way.

Commitment to quality of the entire organization is key to the Quality of the
product and success of the space mission. The management of Product
Assurance is fully embedded in the management of the project and receives the
highest priority from the organization management.

The early identification of aspects potentially detrimental for safety and mission
success, and the cost-effective prevention of any adverse consequence of such
aspects are the basic principles for the ECSS Product Assurance requirements.

Product Assurance Management ensures the integration of activities from the
Product Assurance disciplines defined in the other ECSS standards of the Q
branch, namely:

Q-20 Quality assurance

Q-30 Dependability

Q-40 Safety

Q-60 Electrical, electronic, electromechanical (EEE) components
Q-70 Materials, mechanical parts and processes

Q-80 Software product assurance

4.2 PAprogramme planning

The requirements for Product Assurance planning specified in clause 5.1
address the following aspects:

Definition of a Product Assurance organization with the allocation of
adequate resources, personnel and facilities

Definition of Product Assurance requirements for lower tier suppliers

Definition of a Product Assurance Plan describing the Product Assurance
programme and how it fulfils project objectives and requirements

10



4.3 PAprogramme implementation

The requirements for Product Assurance programme implementation specified
in clause 5.2 address the following aspects:

Management and control of the PA tasks performed by the PA

disciplines
Progress reporting of all Product Assurance matters
Management of audits, critical items, nonconformances and alerts,
Support to the risk management, in coordination with the Project

Management functions

Support to the documentation and data control , quality records and to
configuration management.

Lower-tier supplier control for ensuring implementation of PA
requirements by the suppliers

11



5
Requirements

5.1. PA programme planning

5.1.1 Product Assurance organization and

responsibilities

5.1.1.1. Organization

The supplier shall identify the personnel responsible for implementing
and performing PA management and other PA disciplines.

The supplier shall assign a project PA manager reporting to the project
manager and having unimpeded access to higher management.

The appointed project PA manager, irrespective of other responsibilities,
shall have organizational authority to establish and implement a product
assurance programme in accordance with the project product assurance
requirements.

The project PA Manager shall act as the focal point of contact within the
project concerning Product Assurance matters.

NOTE The project PA manager is referred to as “PA
manager” in the rest of this document.

5.1.1.2 Responsibility and authority

The supplier shall define and document the responsibility, the authority
and the interrelation of personnel who manage, perform and verify work
affecting product assurance.

The supplier shall define and document the responsibilities and the
interfaces of the PA functions, either external or internal, involved in a
project.

When the supplier's PA organization delegates product assurance tasks
to another organization it shall be done in a documented and controlled
way monitored by the PA organization.

NOTE The supplier PA organization retains the
responsibility towards the Customer

12



5.1.1.3 Resources

The supplier shall identify the PA resources needed to implement the PA
programme.

The supplier shall provide resources capable to perform the PA tasks
identified in the PA programme.

Reviews and audits of the product assurance programme, of processes or
of product shall be carried out by personnel not directly involved in the
work being performed.

5.1.2 PA management interfaces

The PA manager shall interface with project management, ensuring that
the contractual provision and schedule planning for the definition and
phasing of PA activities are met.

The PA manager shall interface with risk management, configuration
management, engineering, procurement and AIV for the definition and
execution of tasks in which PA activities are involved.

The PA manager shall interface with the customer regarding all Product
Assurance matters.

The PA manager shall interface with lower-tier suppliers regarding all
Product Assurance matters.

5.1.3 PA plan

The supplier shall prepare, maintain and implement a plan of the PA
activities in accordance with the customer PA requirements.

The Product Assurance plan shall be prepared in conformance with DRD
in Annex The Product Assurance plan shall be submitted to the customer for
approval.

NOTE1 The Product Assurance plan can refer to
Clauses of the Company Quality Manual and to
in-house procedures.

NOTE 2 Information on the schedule for delivery of PA
management documents is given in Annex 5.2 PA programme implementation

5.2.1 Product assurance management

The PA manager shall ensure that PA disciplines are organized at the
beginning of the project according to customer contractual requirements.

13



The PA manager shall ensure that the inputs used by the PA disciplines
are consistent and complete, and available in line with the project
schedule.

The PA manager shall ensure that the PA disciplines perform the tasks
described in the PA Plan in line with the project schedule.

The PA manager shall ensure that the outputs produced by the PA
disciplines are consistent and complete, and delivered in line with the
project schedule.

The PA manager shall ensure the application of processes defined in
applicable project plans and documents.

The PA manager shall control the quality of his supplier’s products by:

1. issuing product assurance requirements applicable to the supplier
2. ensuring the implementation of the PA requirements by the
supplier.

The PA manager shall ensure that PA contributions to verification are
defined and provided.

The PA manager shall ensure that a qualification programme is defined,
approved and maintained by the relevant organization.

NOTE Requirement for the qualification programme
are addressed in ECSS-Q-ST-20, ECSS-Q-ST-60,
ECSS-Q-ST-70, ECSS-Q-ST-80, ECSS-E-ST-10-02
and ECSS-E-ST-10-03.

The PA manager shall ensure that the qualification programme is
implemented and the qualification results are recorded, evaluated and
documented.

The PA manager shall ensure that a Qualification Status List of the
programme items is maintained in conformance with Annex The PA manager shall review and approve the achieved qualification
status.

The PA manager shall approve the product acceptance during the
Acceptance or Delivery Review.

NOTE The PA manager approval is based on the
outputs of the Acceptance or Delivery Review.

For Launch Segment perimeter, the PA manager shall ensure that
Qualification Certificates, identifying the qualified configuration, are
issued for all ground and flight programme items in accordance with
DRD in Annex For Launch Segment perimeter, the PA manager shall sign and approve
the certificates specified in req. 5.2.1m. before final programme manager
acceptance.

The PA manager shall ensure that a Technology Plan is defined,
approved and maintained by the relevant organization.

14



NOTE The technology plan (TP) supports evaluation
of a critical technology to meet the intended
requirements, and ensure effective preparation
of the technologies necessary for the relevant
product. Technology Plan contents are defined
in ECSS-E-ST-10 Annex The PA manager shall ensure that a Technology Readiness Status List
(TRSL) is defined, approved and maintained by the relevant
organization.

NOTE The contents of Technology Readiness Status
List are defined in ECSS-E-ST-10 Annex
2.1<5>.

5.2.2 PA reporting

The supplier shall report on the status and progress of the product
assurance program implementation.

The PA report shall include at least the following items for the reporting
period:

Progress and accomplishment of each major product assurance
task including resolved and new problems, future planning of
major activities and events

Status of PA reviews, Audits and MIPs, Waiver requests, Non
conformances (minor and major), Critical items (including
mitigation action plan status), Qualification status, EEE component
status, Material and processes status, Alerts status.

The PA progress report may be part of the project progress report.

NOTE The general contents of the project progress
report are detailed in ECSS-M-ST-10 Annex 5.2.3 Project PA audits

The supplier shall perform audits on his own performance to verify the
implementation and effectiveness of the provisions defined in the PA
plan.

NOTE1 Audits can be performed by sampling on
various projects or by periodic audits of the
supplier quality system.

NOTE2 The general contents of project audits are
detailed in ECSS-M-ST-10 clause 5.2.3.

The supplier shall establish and maintain an audit plan for procurement
activities on the project, designating the lower tier suppliers to be
audited, the current status and the schedule for auditing.

In addition to the planned audits, extra audits shall be performed when
necessary to overcome failure, consistent poor quality, or other problems.

15



The supplier shall plan and perform audits using established and
maintained procedures.

5.2.4 Critical items control and PA interfaces to

project risk management

The supplier shall establish a critical items control programme in
conformance with ECSS-Q-ST-10-04.

The PA manager shall identify and evaluate critical items in support of
the overall project risk management activities.

The PA manager shall ensure that a critical item control programme is
implemented to eliminate or mitigate associated risks.

5.2.5 Documentation and data control

The PA manager shall ensure that the applicable issues of all documents
and data are available at all locations where activities required for the
implementation of the PA programme are performed.

The PA manager shall ensure that invalid or obsolete documents and
data are removed from all points of issue or use, or assured against
unintended use.

The PA manager shall ensure that obsolete documents and data retained
for legal or knowledge preservation purposes are identified as such.

The PA manager shall identify the project documents requiring approval
including those requiring approval by PA.

5.2.6 Quality records

The supplier shall establish and maintain quality records to provide
objective evidence of complete and successful performance of all PA
discipline tasks and to demonstrate compliance with requirements.

NOTE Requirements for the storage, retrieval and
archiving of quality records are addressed in
ECSS-M-ST-40.

5.2.7 | PAcontribution to configuration

management

The PA manager shall verify during Configuration Control Boards the
suitability for release of drawings, plans, specifications, procedures and
changes thereto.

NOTE The operation of Configuration Control Boards
is detailed in ECSS-M-ST-40

The PA manager shall ensure that:

16




1. the as designed status is defined and released prior to
manufacturing;

2. the as-built documentation is properly defined, identified and

maintained in order to reflect approved modifications; and

3. items delivered comply with the as-built documentation.

5.2.8 Nonconformance control

The supplier shall establish and maintain a nonconformance control
system in conformance with ECSS-Q-ST-10-09.

5.2.9 Management of alerts

The supplier shall notify its customer of preliminary information on
failures or problems that can result in an alert.

NOTE1_ The above is applicable to failure or problems
detected by the supplier or by one of his lower
tier suppliers.

NOTE2 The above is only applicable to failures or
problems meeting all of the following criteria:

e The item with the observed failure or
problem has multiple applications, which
can have implications for more than one
project, thus requiring prompt action.

e The failure or problem has occurred in the
application of an item within the specified
design and usage limitations.

e Failures or problems due to usage within
reasonably expected limits of performance,
but where these limits were not specified
precisely.

e A preliminary investigation has provided
evidence of the root cause of the failure or
problem.

e Failure or problems are confirmed not to be
of a random nature.

The supplier shall investigate in cooperation with the originator of the

failure or problem to define the immediate measures to be taken, to
identify the causes, and to recommend corrective actions for similar
items.

The PA manager shall ensure:

1. the assessment of any failure having the potential to lead to an
alert by the customer,

2. the investigation, until disposition of the items subject of the
potential alert, and

17



the assessment of incoming alerts for the definition,
implementation and follow-up of necessary actions.

The supplier shall participate in the alert system organized by the
customer or other sources, by:

1.

assessment of the impact of incoming alerts to project work, and
definition, implementation and follow-up of necessary corrective
actions at any contractual level.

distribution of incoming alerts to the possible affected users within
the project.

NOTE The alert system is set up for the prompt
interchange of information on failures or
problems which can affect more than one user,
or can recur in other projects or circumstances,
if no preventive actions are taken.

18
