ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 

 
Terms, definitions and abbreviated terms 

  Terms and definitions from other standards 

For the purpose of this Standard, the terms and definitions from ECSS-ST-- 
apply, in particular for the following terms: 
acceptance 
alert 
approval 
assembly 
audit 
component 
configuration item 
conformance 
critical item 
customer 
dependability 
failure 
function 
nonconformance 
performance  
planetary protection 
procedure 
process 
product 
product assurance 
project 
qualification 
quality assurance 
review 

 

ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 

risk 
safety 
space mission 
supplier 
system 
traceability 
waiver 

  Abbreviated terms 

For  the  purpose of this Standard, the  abbreviated terms from ECSS-S-ST-00-01 
and the following apply: 

Abbreviation  Meaning 
EEE 
MIP 
PA 
QA 
QSL 

electrical, electronic, electromechanical 
mandatory inspection point 
product assurance 
quality assurance 
qualification status list 

 

 
ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 

 
Principles 

  General principles 

The  prime  objective  of  Product  Assurance  is  to  ensure  that  space  products 
accomplish  their  defined  mission  objectives  in  a  safe,  available  and  reliable 
way. 
Commitment  to  quality  of  the  entire  organization  is  key  to  the  Quality  of  the 
product  and  success  of  the  space  mission.  The  management  of  Product 
Assurance is fully embedded in the management of the project and receives the 
highest priority from the organization management.  
The early identification of aspects potentially detrimental for safety and mission 
success,  and  the  cost-effective  prevention  of  any  adverse  consequence  of  such 
aspects are the basic principles for the ECSS Product Assurance requirements. 
Product  Assurance  Management  ensures  the  integration  of  activities  from  the 
Product  Assurance  disciplines  defined  in  the  other  ECSS  standards  of  the  Q 
branch, namely: 
 
Q-20 
 
Q-30 
 
Q-40 
 
Q-60 
 
Q-70 
 
Q-80 

Quality assurance 
Dependability 
Safety 
Electrical, electronic, electromechanical (EEE) components 
Materials, mechanical parts and processes 
Software product assurance 

  PA programme planning 

The  requirements  for  Product  Assurance  planning  specified  in  clause   
address the following aspects: 
 

Definition  of  a  Product  Assurance  organization  with  the  allocation  of 
adequate resources, personnel and facilities 
Definition of Product Assurance requirements for lower tier suppliers 
Definition of a Product Assurance Plan describing the Product Assurance 
programme and how it fulfils project objectives and requirements 

 
 

 

ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 

  PA programme implementation 

The requirements for Product Assurance programme implementation specified 
in clause  address the following aspects: 
 

Management  and  control  of  the  PA  tasks  performed  by  the  PA 
disciplines 
Progress reporting of all Product Assurance matters 
Management of audits, critical items, nonconformances and alerts, 
Support  to  the  risk  management,  in  coordination  with  the  Project 
Management functions 
Support  to  the  documentation  and  data  control  ,  quality  records  and  to 
configuration management. 
Lower-tier  supplier  control 
requirements by the suppliers 

implementation  of  PA 

for  ensuring 

 
 
 

 

 

 

ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 

 
Requirements 

  PA programme planning 

 

Product Assurance organization and 
responsibilities 

Organization  
The  supplier  shall  identify  the  personnel  responsible  for  implementing 
and performing PA management and other PA disciplines. 
The  supplier  shall  assign  a  project  PA  manager  reporting  to  the  project 
manager and having unimpeded access to higher management. 
The appointed project PA manager, irrespective of other responsibilities, 
shall have organizational authority to establish and implement a product 
assurance  programme  in  accordance  with  the  project  product  assurance 
requirements. 
The project PA Manager shall act as the focal point of contact within the 
project concerning Product Assurance matters. 

NOTE 

The  project  PA  manager  is  referred  to  as  “PA 
manager” in the rest of this document. 

  Responsibility and authority  
The supplier shall define and document the  responsibility, the authority 
and the interrelation of personnel who manage, perform and verify work 
affecting product assurance. 
The  supplier  shall  define  and  document  the  responsibilities  and  the 
interfaces  of  the  PA  functions,  either  external  or  internal,  involved  in  a 
project. 

When  the  supplier's  PA  organization  delegates  product  assurance  tasks 
to another organization it shall be done in a documented and controlled 
way monitored by the PA organization. 

NOTE 

The  supplier  PA  organization  retains  the 
responsibility towards the Customer 

 

 
 
ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 

  Resources  
The supplier shall identify the PA resources needed to implement the PA 
programme. 
The  supplier  shall  provide  resources  capable  to  perform  the  PA  tasks 
identified in the PA programme. 
Reviews and audits of the product assurance programme, of processes or 
of product shall be carried out by personnel not directly involved in the 
work being performed. 

PA management interfaces 

 
The PA manager shall interface with project management, ensuring that 
the  contractual  provision  and  schedule  planning  for  the  definition  and 
phasing of PA activities are met. 
The  PA  manager  shall  interface  with  risk  management,  configuration 
management,  engineering,  procurement  and  AIV  for  the  definition  and 
execution of tasks in which PA activities are involved. 
The PA manager shall interface with the customer regarding all Product 
Assurance matters. 
The  PA  manager  shall  interface  with  lower-tier  suppliers  regarding  all 
Product Assurance matters. 

PA plan 

 
The  supplier  shall  prepare,  maintain  and  implement  a  plan  of  the  PA 
activities in accordance with the customer PA requirements. 
The Product Assurance plan shall be prepared in conformance with DRD 
in Annex The  Product  Assurance  plan  shall  be  submitted  to  the  customer  for 
approval. 

NOTE   The  Product  Assurance  plan  can  refer  to 
Clauses of the Company Quality Manual and to 
in-house procedures. 
Information on the schedule for delivery of PA 
management documents is given in Annex NOTE  

  PA programme implementation 

 
Product assurance management 

The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  PA  disciplines  are  organized  at  the 
beginning of the project according to customer contractual requirements. 

 

ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 
The PA manager shall ensure that the inputs used by the PA disciplines 
are  consistent  and  complete,  and  available  in  line  with  the  project 
schedule. 
The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  the  PA  disciplines  perform  the  tasks 
described in the PA Plan in line with the project schedule. 
The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  the  outputs  produced  by  the  PA 
disciplines  are  consistent  and  complete,  and  delivered  in  line  with  the 
project schedule. 
The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  the  application  of  processes  defined  in 
applicable project plans and documents.  
The PA manager shall control the quality of his supplier’s products by: 

issuing product assurance requirements applicable to the supplier  

ensuring  the  implementation  of  the  PA  requirements  by  the 
supplier. 

The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  PA  contributions  to  verification  are 
defined and provided. 
The PA manager shall ensure that a qualification programme is defined, 
approved and maintained by the relevant organization. 

NOTE 

Requirement  for  the  qualification  programme 
are addressed in ECSS-Q-ST-20, ECSS-Q-ST-60, 
ECSS-Q-ST-100,  ECSS-Q-ST-101,  ECSS-Q-ST-102 
and ECSS-Q-ST-103 

The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  the  qualification  programme  is 
implemented  and  the  qualification  results  are  recorded,  evaluated  and 
documented. 
The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  a  Qualification  Status  List  of  the 
programme items is maintained in conformance with Annex The  PA  manager  shall  review  and  approve  the  achieved  qualification 
status. 
The  PA  manager  shall  approve  the  product  acceptance  during  the 
Acceptance or Delivery Review. 

NOTE 

The  PA  manager  approval  is  based  on  the 
outputs of the Acceptance or Delivery Review. 

For  Launch  Segment  perimeter,  the  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  
Qualification  Certificates,  identifying  the  qualified  configuration,  are 
issued  for  all  ground  and  flight  programme  items  in  accordance  with 
DRD in Annex For Launch Segment perimeter, the  PA manager shall sign and approve 
the certificates specified in req. .1m. before final programme manager 
acceptance. 
The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  a  Technology  Plan  is  defined, 
approved and maintained by the relevant organization. 

ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 

NOTE 

The  technology  plan  (TP)  supports  evaluation 
of  a  critical  technology  to  meet  the  intended 
requirements,  and  ensure  effective  preparation 
of  the  technologies  necessary  for  the  relevant 
product.  Technology  Plan  contents  are  defined 
in ECSS-Q-ST-105 Annex is  defined,  approved  and  maintained  by 

The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  a  Technology  Readiness  Status  List 
the  relevant 
(TRSL) 
organization. 
NOTE 

The  contents  of  Technology  Readiness  Status 
in  ECSS-Q-ST-105  Annex 
List  are  defined 
<>. 

PA reporting 

 
The  supplier  shall  report  on  the  status  and  progress  of  the  product 
assurance program implementation. 
The PA report shall include at least the following items for the reporting 
period: 

 

 

Progress  and  accomplishment  of  each  major  product  assurance 
task  including  resolved  and  new  problems,  future  planning  of 
major activities and events 
Status  of  PA  reviews,  Audits  and  MIPs,  Waiver  requests,  Non 
items  (including 
conformances  (minor  and  major),  Critical 
mitigation action plan status), Qualification status, EEE component 
status, Material and processes status, Alerts status. 
The PA progress report may be part of the project progress report.  
The  general  contents  of  the  project  progress 
report are detailed in ECSS-Q-ST-107 Annex NOTE 

Project PA audits 

 
The supplier shall perform audits on  his own performance to  verify the 
implementation  and  effectiveness  of  the  provisions  defined  in  the  PA 
plan. 

NOTE   Audits  can  be  performed  by  sampling  on 
various  projects  or  by  periodic  audits  of  the 
supplier quality system. 

NOTE   The  general  contents  of  project  audits  are 
detailed in ECSS-Q-ST-107 clause . 
The supplier shall establish and maintain an audit plan for procurement 
activities  on  the  project,  designating  the  lower  tier  suppliers  to  be 
audited, the current status and the schedule for auditing. 
In addition to the planned audits, extra  audits shall be performed when 
necessary to overcome failure, consistent poor quality, or other problems.  

ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 
The  supplier  shall  plan  and  perform  audits  using  established  and 
maintained procedures. 

Critical items control and PA interfaces to 
project risk management 

The  supplier  shall  establish  a  critical  items  control  programme  in 
conformance with ECSS-Q-ST-10-. 
The  PA  manager  shall  identify  and  evaluate  critical  items  in  support  of 
the overall project risk management activities. 
The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  a  critical  item  control  programme  is 
implemented to eliminate or mitigate associated risks. 

Documentation and data control 

 
The PA manager shall ensure that the applicable issues of all documents 
and  data  are  available  at  all  locations  where  activities  required  for  the 
implementation of the PA programme are performed. 
The  PA  manager  shall  ensure  that  invalid  or  obsolete  documents  and 
data  are  removed  from  all  points  of  issue  or  use,  or  assured  against 
unintended use. 
The PA manager shall ensure that obsolete documents and data retained 
for legal or knowledge preservation purposes are identified as such. 
The PA manager shall identify the project documents requiring approval 
including those requiring approval by PA. 

Quality records 
The  supplier  shall  establish  and  maintain  quality  records  to  provide 
objective  evidence  of  complete  and  successful  performance  of  all  PA 
discipline tasks and to demonstrate compliance with requirements. 
Requirements  for  the  storage,  retrieval  and 
archiving  of  quality  records  are  addressed  in 
ECSS-S-ST-00-011 

NOTE 

 

PA contribution to configuration 
management 

The  PA  manager  shall  verify  during  Configuration  Control  Boards  the 
suitability  for  release  of  drawings,  plans,  specifications,  procedures  and 
changes thereto. 
NOTE 

The operation of Configuration Control Boards 
is detailed in ECSS-S-ST-00-012 

The PA manager shall ensure that: 

 

 
 
ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 
to 

is  defined  and  released  prior 

the  as  designed  status 
manufacturing; 
the  as-built  documentation  is  properly  defined,  identified  and 
maintained in order to reflect approved modifications; and 
items delivered comply with the as-built documentation. 

Nonconformance control 

 
The  supplier  shall  establish  and  maintain  a  nonconformance  control 
system in conformance with ECSS-Q-ST-10-. 

  Management of alerts 
The  supplier  shall  notify  its  customer  of  preliminary  information  on 
failures or problems that can result in an alert. 

NOTE   The  above  is  applicable  to  failure  or  problems 
detected by the supplier or by one of his lower 
tier suppliers. 

NOTE   The  above  is  only  applicable  to  failures  or 
problems meeting all of the following criteria: 
  The  item  with  the  observed  failure  or 
problem  has  multiple  applications,  which 
can  have  implications  for  more  than  one 
project, thus requiring prompt action. 
  The  failure  or  problem  has  occurred  in  the 
application  of  an  item  within  the  specified 
design and usage limitations.  

  Failures  or  problems  due  to  usage  within 
reasonably  expected  limits  of  performance, 
but  where  these  limits  were  not  specified 
precisely. 

  A  preliminary  investigation  has  provided 
evidence  of  the  root  cause  of  the  failure  or 
problem. 

  Failure or problems are confirmed not to be 

of a random nature. 

The  supplier  shall  investigate  in  cooperation  with  the  originator  of  the 
failure  or  problem  to  define  the  immediate  measures  to  be  taken,  to 
identify  the  causes,  and  to  recommend  corrective  actions  for  similar 
items. 
The PA manager shall ensure: 

the  assessment  of  any  failure  having  the  potential  to  lead  to  an 
alert by the customer, 
the  investigation,  until  disposition  of  the  items  subject  of  the 
potential alert, and 

ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 
the  definition, 

for 

alerts 

incoming 

assessment  of 

the 
implementation and follow-up of necessary actions. 

The  supplier  shall  participate  in  the  alert  system  organized  by  the 
customer or other sources, by: 

assessment  of  the  impact  of  incoming  alerts  to  project  work,  and 
definition,  implementation  and  follow-up  of  necessary  corrective 
actions at any contractual level. 
distribution of incoming alerts to the possible affected users within 
the project. 
NOTE 

The  alert  system  is  set  up  for  the  prompt 
interchange  of 
information  on  failures  or 
problems which can affect more than one user, 
or can recur in other projects or circumstances, 
if no preventive actions are taken. 

 

 
ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev. 
 

 
Pre-tailoring matrix per space product 
types and project phases 

The Matrix of Table - presents the pre-tailoring of ECSS-Q-ST-10C Rev.  per 
space product type. 
For the terminology and definitions of the nine space product types see ECSS-S-
ST--.  Attention  of  the  reader  is  drawn  to  the  importance  of  the  precise 
meaning of these terms for an appropriate application of the present table. 

The applicability of a requirement is specified as follows: 
 
 

“A” when applicable, 
“A#” when requirement is applicable with supplementary information in 
the “Comment” column 
“X#” when the applicability is to be decided on a case by case basis, with 
explanation in the “Comment” column, or 
“NA” when not applicable 

 

 

The  number  assigned  for  comments  relating  to  each  relevant  column  marked 
with  A#  or  X#  starts  at    and  increases  incrementally  left  to  right  across  the 
columns, and then starts afresh on the next row. 

 

 
 
